Lorde Is Older but Somehow Less Jaded

With Melodrama, the singer who once attacked convention takes on familiar pop themesbut keeps her fresh musical sensibility.

SPENCER KORNHABER  JUN 16, 2017   CULTURE

Dont you think that its boring how people talk?

Thats what Lorde asked in the first line of Pure Heroine, the 2013 album that earned the New Zealand teen Ella Yelich-OConnor global superstardom and the admiration of David Bowie. The question signaled not only Lordes appealing nonconformity but that Lorde herself knew, from the start, that her appeal would be nonconformity. Using skeletal beats and a creaky-breathy way with words, she critiqued pop cultures materialismCristal, Maybach, diamonds on your timepieceand worship of white-teeth teens. Its a new art form showing people how little we care, she sneered, and with 90s rock disaffection long in the rearview mirror, it really did feel new.

Four years later, she and her shtick have migrated from outsider to insider. The charts are littered with singers that not only sound like Lorde but insist on their beyond-it-all cool in much the same way she did. Alessia Caras 2015 hit Here epitomized the soundalikes, with a young singer sighing from amid a bustling party about how shed rather be back home, nursing her anti-social soul. How might Lorde continue to stand out when the rest of the culture has caught up? Is it still interesting for her to continually announce her uniqueness when her generation hasfairly or notbecome synonymous with the practice of, well, announcing ones own uniqueness?

The most surprising thing about Melodrama, her long-awaited sophomore album, is how thoroughly it ditches Lordes jadedness and instead stakes her claim to individuality on the intensity of her emotions. We pretend we dont care, but we care, she sings on Sober, seeming to mock the new art form she once sang about. Melodramas loose conceit is a night at a house party, with highs of drunken fun and hookups and with lows of drunken introspection and breakups: standard pop fare, really. The distinguishing factor, she seems to say, is her tragic vibrancyrelationships keep disintegrating because she is a liability, as she sings on the ballad of the same name and its later reprise.

Her songs are still often built off syncopated stomping grooves, halfway between a hip-hop beat and We Will Rock You. But thanks in part to the producer Jack Antonoffthe 80s obsessive behind the band Fun and some of Taylor Swifts 1989the color palette is more diverse and the dynamic range is bigger, more accommodating of sentimentality. Green Light, the lead single, made a statement with sharp turns into house music and walloping eruptions of arena rock. Other highlights include Sober, whose Latin shimmying gives way to gothic choruses; The Louvre, a dreamily strummed tribute to Echo & the Bunnymen; and Supercut, a nostalgic rave poised to be Lordes next hit. None of them cohere as undeniable, gemlike pop achievements in the way Royals did. But few songs ever will.

Lordes lyrics can at times seem belabored, and her essay in the liner notesI hope you listen for every breath and broken heartstringsets the template for some of the albums more precious lines: We were wild and fluorescent, come home to my heart, she sings at one point, sounding a bit like any pop star on autopilot. But she still turns out more killer phrases than dead ones. The second verse of Homemade Dynamite is a grim, sardonic fantasy of a drunk-driving accidentWell end up painted on the road / Red and chrome / All the broken glass sparkling / I guess were partying. And the Phil Collins-esque opening of Hard Feelings/Loveless paints a touching scene of her sitting in a car with a beau on the verge of splitting. I guess I should go, she concludes.

Whenever it seems shes exhausted ways to label herself, she hits on a crackling new coinage.

Lines like those show how Lorde excels at creating vignettes within songs, mini-moments that risk dampening a tracks propulsion but end up making the big picture more vivid. On the ravishing The Louvre, she has a jokey spoken aside about how she and her squeeze are going to have their portraits displayed in Parisdown the back, but who cares? Still the Louvre. Amid the whirling high of Supercut, the music cuts out for a moment of quiet reflection before the final swell. The willingness to hit pause fits with the albums theme of sorting through ones own experiences for mementos, rendering memory only as a series of highs and lows.  

At times, that mode of filtering and organizing the past can seem a bit too pat in the era of endless Instagram scrolling. Ditto for Lordes theatrical tellings of dangerous, doomed love affairs. But whenever it seems shes exhausted all possible ways of labeling herself a sweetheart psychopathic crush, she hits on a crackling new coinage or sound. Take Writer in the Dark, a wonderful nightmare of a piano piece in which she multiplies into a brood of falsetto demons warning, Ill love you till my breathing stops / Ill love you til you call the cops on me. Shes saying something thats been said many times before in song, but shes still saying it more interestingly than most people.