Letter to my younger self: your business is your life

Kate Jackson left her career in law to realise her lifelong dream of starting a business. She now runs networking enterprise TableCrowd

Dear Kate,

Youre 29 and well into your first year of running your own business, an online dating and parties website. You havent looked back since leaving your career as a solicitor  a job that you enjoyed, but that was never your dream.

Entrepreneurship leaves little time to reflect as you turn an idea sketched out on a scrap of paper into a business plan to win over investors. But remember, this is what youve wanted since you were a child. Youll always look back fondly on the moment you received your first certificate of company incorporation.

Right now you feel that everything rides on your business idea; your success, your happiness and your financial security. But, eventually, youll see that your first venture isnt the one. While the failures will cut deep, the next success is always just around the corner, because youll ensure that it is.

Over the next three years, youll sacrifice everything for your first business. You wont see your friends and youll miss out on the fun when youre strapped for cash. Youll find yourself, for example, choosing between paying a bill to avoid a court summons or splashing out for a cocktail-making class on a best friends hen do.

Youre lucky that your friends are generous. And while youll find missing out difficult, you are working on the business you love and, at the moment, that business is your life.

Eventually, youll stop and reflect: youve squeezed six years work into three. Starting a business is probably one of the hardest career choices, but it can be rewarding in more ways than you expected. The penny will drop that this is not a sprint, but a marathon. Commercial success may be your focus, but youll see that finding enjoyment in each working day is also vital.

You experience the value of good advice and a powerful network. So much time and worry is saved by picking up the phone to someone whos been there, rather than battling through every problem alone.

Youll surround yourself with people who inspire you and enhance your life, while cutting ties with those who follow you around like dark rain clouds.

Great things happen from making new contacts, and having the right people around you. Youll find connecting people immensely rewarding. This will inspire you to start a new business, TableCrowd. Through this you will build an offline network who meet at your dinner events, which revolve around a range of business topics.

Youll look differently at what success means and see that it has many facets. The day-to-day is bursting with small wins that you dont always recognise  fantastic feedback from customers, hitting milestones, gaining press coverage or securing vital investment. Too often you let the successes pass you by, while the things that go wrong linger. Remember to savour the good moments.

Youre programmed to work hard, but youll eventually find a balance. Taking a break, a day off here and there, is beneficial to the business. It makes you better at your work. And those days off mean a happier personal life, seeing friends and doing the things you enjoy.

The 10 years that lie ahead will be all about extremes. Youll swing from closing large funding rounds, to having so little money that youll punch the air when the Tesco Clubcard vouchers arrive.

Youll meet people who expand your mind and leave you in awe, through to unscrupulous weasels who are out to take what they can get. Youll work with people who are fiercely loyal to those who try to bully you. Youll undertake work from the most mundane and repetitive to that which leaves you brimming with pride.

Youll make many mistakes along the way, but you wont regret your choices. So many rich experiences lie ahead of you: the future looks bright.

Kate

Kate Jackson is the founder and CEO of TableCrowd.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
